+++
title = "Tree rings provide no evidence of a CO2 fertilization effect in old-growth subalpine forests of western Canada"
date = "2018-12-27"

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["O Hararuk", "E Campbell", "J Antos", "R Parish"]

# Publication type.
# Legend:
# 0 = Uncategorized
# 1 = Conference proceedings
# 2 = Journal
# 3 = Work in progress
# 4 = Technical report
# 5 = Book
# 6 = Book chapter
publication_types = ["2"]

# Publication name and optional abbreviated version.
publication = "In Global Change Biology"
#publication = "In *Ecological Modelling*, Ecol Modell."
publication_short = "In *Global Change Biology*"

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = "Atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations are now 1.7 times higher than the pre-industrial values. Although photosynthetic rates are hypothesized to increase in response to rising atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations, results from in situ experiments are inconsistent in supporting a CO<sub>2</sub> fertilization effect of tree growth. Tree ring data provide a historical record of tree-level productivity that can be used to evaluate long-term responses of tree growth. We use tree-ring data from old-growth, subalpine forests of western Canada that have not had a stand-replacing disturbance for hundreds of years to determine if growth has increased over 19<sup>th</sup> and 20<sup>th</sup> centuries. Our sample consisted of 5,858 trees belonging to five species distributed over two sites in the coastal zone and two in the continental climate of the interior. We calculated annual increments in tree basal area, adjusted these increments for tree size and age, and tested whether there was a detectable temporal trend in tree growth over the 19<sup>th</sup> and 20<sup>th</sup> centuries. We found a similar pattern in 20<sup>th</sup> century growth trends among all species at all sites. Growth during the 19<sup>th</sup> century was mostly stable or increasing, with the exception of one of the coastal sites, where tree growth was slightly decreasing; whereas growth during the 20<sup>th</sup> century consistently decreased. The unexpected decrease in growth during the 20<sup>th</sup> century indicates that there was no CO<sub>2</sub> fertilization effect on photosynthesis. We compared the growth trends from our four sites to the trends simulated by seven Earth System Models, and saw that most of the models did not predict these growth declines. Overall, our results indicate that these old-growth forests are unlikely to increase their carbon storage capacity in response to rising atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub>, and thus are unlikely to contribute substantially to offsetting future carbon emissions."

# Featured image thumbnail (optional)
image_preview = "headers/GCB_2018.png"

# Is this a selected publication? (true/false)
selected = true

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this publication with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter the filename (excluding '.md') of your project file in `content/project/`.
projects = ["tree_productivity"]

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = ""
url_preprint = ""
url_code = ""
url_dataset = ""
url_project = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_poster = ""
url_source = ""

# Custom links (optional).
#   Uncomment line below to enable. For multiple links, use the form `[{...}, {...}, {...}]`.
url_custom = [{name = "Custom Link", url = "https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/gcb.14561"}]

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = true

# Does the content use source code highlighting?
highlight = true

# Featured image
# Place your image in the `static/img/` folder and reference its filename below, e.g. `image = "example.jpg"`.
[header]
image = "headers/GCB_2018_1.png"
caption = "GCB_2018"

+++

More detail can easily be written here using *Markdown* and $\rm \LaTeX$ math code.
